SOUNDSHREDDER FOR MAC
Separate dialogue, music and effects. Keep only the sound you want.

QUICK START
1. Extract the ZIP by double-clicking it in Finder.
2. Move the entire SoundShredder folder somewhere writable, such as Documents.
3. Install Python 3.11 using the "macOS 64-bit universal2 installer":
   https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3119/
   This installer works on both Apple Silicon and Intel Macs.
   Complete Python's certificate setup too: open Applications > Python 3.11 >
   Install Certificates.command. Wait for "update complete" before continuing.
4. Double-click "Start SoundShredder.command" inside the extracted folder.
   First launch downloads and installs the local Python packages automatically.
5. Your default browser opens http://127.0.0.1:7860
   Drop an audio/video file, choose what to keep, and click Separate audio.
6. Listen to the separate tracks, adjust their levels, and download your mix.

Keep the Terminal window open while using the app. Press Control+C to stop it.
To use it again, double-click the same launcher. Setup is reused automatically.
Keep the whole folder together; the launcher needs the other files beside it.

REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE
- macOS 12 Monterey or newer.
- Apple Silicon (M-series) or Intel processor; the installer detects which.
- Python 3.11 is recommended for this Mac package. Intel: Python 3.10-3.11.
  Apple Silicon: Python 3.10-3.13. Use native Python, without Rosetta.
- This Mac version processes on CPU. Auto selects CPU on Mac.
  Apple Metal/MPS GPU acceleration is not included in this version.
- CPU processing can take several minutes, even for short clips.
- Internet is needed for initial installation and the first separation.
  The model download is approximately 426 MB. Later runs can work offline.
- The Python runtime is not bundled in this ZIP. No Homebrew, Xcode, separate
  FFmpeg installation, cloud subscription, or API key is needed.

IF MACOS DOES NOT OPEN THE LAUNCHER
After extracting this trusted package, try Control-click > Open in Finder.
You can also launch it directly from Terminal:
1. Type "bash " (including the trailing space, without quotes).
2. Drag "Start SoundShredder.command" from Finder into Terminal.
3. Press Return.
This also works if your ZIP extractor did not preserve executable permissions.
Do not run the launcher with sudo.

TROUBLESHOOTING
- Python not found: install the Python 3.11 universal2 .pkg linked above,
  then reopen the launcher. Python 3.14+ is not supported by this package.
- Certificate verification failed after installing Python from python.org:
  see CERTIFICATE_VERIFY_FAILED WHEN PROCESSING A VIDEO below, or the complete
  guide and repair ZIP in support/mac/.
- Intel Mac: setup automatically uses PyTorch 2.2.2 and NumPy 1.26.4.
  Do not manually upgrade those packages; newer PyTorch wheels do not support
  Intel macOS. requirements-mac-intel.txt keeps the compatible versions together.
  Python 3.12 is also unsuitable for Intel here: the model's disabled compiler
  calls still trigger a Python-version guard in that older PyTorch release.
- Rosetta message: turn off "Open using Rosetta" in Terminal's Get Info panel,
  install native universal2 Python, and start again from a fresh extracted ZIP.
- Incomplete or incompatible environment: stop the app, then extract a fresh
  copy of the ZIP to a new folder and launch it. Your old data remains in the
  original folder; move any finished exports somewhere safe before discarding it.
- Model download failed: check the internet connection and retry separation.
- Browser did not open: visit http://127.0.0.1:7860 while Terminal is running.
- Need another port: in Terminal, cd to the extracted folder and run:
  .venv/bin/python app.py --port 7861

YOUR FILES
Audio stays on your computer. Uploads, stems and mixes are saved under data/
inside this folder. The model is cached in ~/.cache/bandit-infer/.
Delete this session in the UI removes that session's local copies and outputs.
Save the files you want to keep elsewhere first. Original source files are not
overwritten.

MANUAL SETUP (OPTIONAL)
In Terminal, cd to the extracted SoundShredder folder, then run:
  python3.11 setup_runtime.py --device cpu
  .venv/bin/python app.py

CERTIFICATE_VERIFY_FAILED WHEN PROCESSING A VIDEO
The local page can open even when Python cannot verify an HTTPS model download.
First processing downloads Bandit from Zenodo, or AudioSep from Hugging Face.
For Python 3.11.9, stop SoundShredder with Control+C in its Terminal window, run:
  open "/Applications/Python 3.11/Install Certificates.command"
Then reopen Start SoundShredder.command and retry. Use the matching major/minor
folder if your installed Python version differs. Never disable SSL verification.
Python 3.11.9 uses the folder named Python 3.11, not Python 3.11.9.

For an older source installation, an alternative repair launcher is included at:
  support/mac/SoundShredder-Mac-Certificate-Fix.zip
Stop the old app with Control+C, extract that ZIP, and copy ONLY
"Start SoundShredder - Certificate Fix.command" beside your existing app.py.
Double-click the new launcher and retry. Keep your existing .venv and data folders;
you do not need to reinstall the runtime or replace the whole project folder.
Closing the browser tab alone does not stop the old app.

The updated launcher also uses the venv's certifi (or pip's bundled certificate
store) when Python has no default CA roots. Existing certificate settings are
preserved. If certificate errors persist, a VPN/proxy or network HTTPS inspection
may need its trusted certificate configured by the network administrator.
Retain the full Terminal error, Python version, processing mode and download
hostname if shown. Full troubleshooting: support/mac/README.md.
This source repair launcher is not for the standalone .app's bundled Python.

Full feature documentation: README.md
What has and has not been tested: VERIFICATION.md

GITHUB AND UPDATES
Use GitHub project or Check for updates in the app. Checks run only when clicked
and compare your installed version with the latest stable GitHub release.
A newer version links to the release downloads. No audio or session data is sent.
To update, close the app, extract the new ZIP into a new folder, and copy your
old data folder into it to retain sessions. Run the new launcher. Keep your old
folder until the new version works. See README.md for the full update guide.

LISTEN TO SEPARATE TRACKS
After processing, scroll to Listen to each layer. Dialogue, Music, Sound effects,
and Removed sounds each have their own waveform, player, volume and download.
Playing one pauses the others. Keep playback position when switching tracks
lets you compare the same moment; turn it off for independent positions.
For Bubble FX, click Prepare isolated tracks once to generate the other three
tracks from the original audio. It uses CPU on Mac and keeps your cleaned mix
unchanged. Preview volume does not affect exported files.

BUBBLE FX (EXPERIMENTAL)
Choose Bubble FX, select the bubble type, and optionally limit cleanup to
a time range (for example, 7 to 11 seconds). Start at 85% reduction.
Listen to Removed sound before using the cleaned mix: similar effects can
be reduced too. Lower reduction or narrow the range, then Update mix for a
single pass. For stubborn Water bubbles, enable Aggressive multi-pass and
start with 2 passes; 3 and 4 are stronger and take longer on CPU. Each pass
analyzes the preceding cleaned audio. Removed sounds includes every pass.
Changing passes, sound type, or multi-pass strength/timing requires a new run.
Clean up again reuses the saved source in a new session and keeps prior results.
This preset uses CPU on Mac and downloads a separate 1.2 GB AudioSep model
on first use to ~/.cache/soundshredder/audiosep/. It then works offline.
Outputs are 32-bit float WAV, preserving decoded samples outside your selected
range exactly. No extra Python packages or accounts are needed.
